Podman (#100)
openSUSE/openSUSE-docs-revamped: project/docs/install_podman.md

## What is Podman

> Podman is a a daemonless, open-source tool to manage, deploy and build application containers. Podman is using Open Containers Initiative (OCI) Containers and container images, which means that containers crated with/for Docker or CRI-o will work with Podman as well and vice versa. It is coming with a command line interface (CLI) which offers pretty much the same commands like Docker does. How similar are Podman commands to Docker's? Let's put it this way: many Podman users just alias `docker` to `podman`. Like other runtimes, Podman also relies on an OCI compliant container runtime to interface with the operating system. Podamn also has a RESTful API to manage containers, offers automatic updates of containers and has a fantastic `systemd` integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Podman is a daemon-less, open-source tool to manage, deploy and build application containers. Podman is using Open Containers Initiative (OCI) Containers and Container Images, which means that containers crated with/for Docker or CRI-o will work with Podman as well and vice versa. It is coming with a command-line interface (CLI) which offers pretty much the same commands as Docker does. How similar are Podman commands to Docker? Let's put it this way: many Podman users just alias `docker` to `podman`. Like other runtimes, Podman also relies on an OCI compliant container runtime to interface with the operating system. Podamn also has a RESTful API to manage containers, offers automatic updates of containers, and has a fantastic `systemd` integration.
```

## Getting containers running

### Rootfull or rootless

> As Podman is daemonless, running containers doesn't require running them with root, but can be started with a user as well. Granted, rootless containers will have no access to networking and can't use privileged ports, but it is a great way to keep the system secure. For instance if an application escapes the container ran as a user it will be able to cause less damage and would have limited access to the system than if it would if it would ran as root. Rootfull containers are recommended for running applications that require access over privileged ports like a public facing `nginx` reverse proxy. Even in that case there could be some rules implemented in the firewall that forwards requests, but that's a different story.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Podman is daemonless, running containers doesn't require running them with root but can be started with a user as well. Granted, rootless containers will have no access to networking and can't use privileged ports, but it is a great way to keep the system secure. For instance, if an application escapes the container ran as a user it will be able to cause less damage and would have limited access to the system than if it would run as root. Rootfull containers are recommended for running applications that require access over privileged ports like a public facing `Nginx reverse proxy. Even in that case, there could be some rules implemented in the firewall that forwards requests, but that's a different story
```

81a872daad5661a7704e47c4f5025db502852cf7cc0aaaa439e71a9fa915e9b9
bc5030bffd6c604192c31911141d728378b69832cafbf81d97d976d59fc5f86d
[~] podman rmi nginx #Delete the image                                                                         
Untagged: docker.io/library/nginx:latest
Deleted: f6d0b4767a6c466c178bf718f99bea0d3742b26679081e52dbf8e0c7c4c42d74
$ podman images #List available, pulled images
REPOSITORY                                 TAG     IMAGE ID      CREATED      SIZE
registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/tumbleweed  latest  111d1befeae4  2 days ago   94.4 MB
registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/nginx       latest  36fa073c57cc  3 days ago   103 MB
docker.io/prom/prometheus                  latest  19162aa1f28d  2 weeks ago  174 MB
```

#### Managing images

To list all available images use `podman images`. This will provide a list of every image that is currently available in the system and ready to be used without needing to pull it from a registry. To delete an image use `podman rmi`. Visit the `podman images` man page for more.

### Podman Pods

> The `pod` concept has been introduced in Kuberentes and Docker users usually don't even think of the possibility or benefits to run pods in a local runtime or a development environment. Pods are great if for example you need a database (db) container that you don't want to bind to a routable network. In comes the idea of the `pod`. Instead of binding the db to a routable network you can bind it to `localhost` therefore other containers within the pod can connect to it using `localhost` as they share the network name space. Another use case can be to group containers in pods. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pod` concept has been introduced in Kubernetes and Docker users usually don't even think of the possibility or benefits to run pods in a local runtime or a development environment. Pods are great if, for example, you need a database (DB) container that you don't want to bind to a routable network. In comes the idea of the `pod`. Instead of binding the DB to a routable network, you can bind it to `localhost` therefore other containers within the pod can connect to it using `localhost` as they share the network namespace. Another use case can be to group containers in pods.
```

> Every pod has an 'infra' container that functions as the namespace holder, stores data on port bindings, cgroup-parent values, and kernel namespaces are all assigned to the “infra” container. Once the pod is created these values can not be changed. The pod can also allow to start, stop, pause multiple containers at once just by doing the same as would with a single container, but instead by container the commands can be executed by pods resulting of a desired effect, but faster and a lot more comfortably.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Every pod has an 'infra' container that functions as the namespace holder, stores data on port bindings, cgroup-parent values, and kernel namespaces are all assigned to the “infra” container. Once the pod is created these values can not be changed. The pod can also allow starting, stop, pause multiple containers at once just by doing the same as would with a single container, but instead by container the commands can be executed by pods resulting in the desired effect, but faster and a lot more comfortably.
```

[~] podman ps  --pod                                                                                                                                                        
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                 COMMAND          CREATED         STATUS             PORTS                   NAMES                      POD ID        PODNAME
13e9f16b1aaa  nginx                 /usr/sbin/nginx  30 seconds ago  Up 30 seconds ago  0.0.0.0:8000->8000/tcp  yaltb-condescendinggalois  ce21bc068940  yaltb
c78bebfb3cc3  k8s.gcr.io/pause:3.2                   30 seconds ago  Up 30 seconds ago  0.0.0.0:8000->8000/tcp  ce21bc068940-infra         ce21bc068940  yaltb
 
```
Lets break down the above:
* `podman generate kube yaltb` will generated a `YAML` file which one can take to another server and `play` it providing the same exact pod that it is running on the local runtime.
* `podman pod stop yaltb` will stop the `yaltb` pod and all the containers in it.
* `podman pod rm yaltb` will delete the `yaltb` pod.
* `podman play kube yaltb_pod.yml` will start the exported pods based on the `YAML` file. The pod and the containers in the pod listed in the following commands.

### Podman and systemd

> Podman has a fantastic integration with `systemd`. I believe at this point the users are even able to run `systemd` **within** a container which makes perfect sense. Why would we have to use anything different inside a container than we already got used to outside of a container. Anyhow we not covering this, but managing containers with `systemd`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Podman has fantastic integration with `systemd`. Users are even able to run `systemd` **within** a container which makes perfect sense. Why would we have to use anything different inside a container than we already got used to outside of a container? Anyhow, we are not covering this, but managing containers with `systemd`. 
```

This to be followed by generating `systemd` units for the container: `podman generate systemd --new --files [container ID or name]`. Once this is ready and the unit file is under the corresponding `systemd` folder - depending on how podman is used, rootfull or rootless - the container unit to be started. Following this the `podman auto-update` command can update every container with changed images.
## References

I strongly suggest checking out the man pages of podman which provides a lot of information straight from the terminal. Also the following articles will help a lot on your `podman` journey:
* https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/compose-podman-pods
* https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/rootless-podman-makes-sense
* https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/behind-scenes-podman
* https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/user-flag-rootless-containers
* https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/understanding-root-inside-and-outside-container
* https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2019/01/15/podman-managing-containers-pods/
* https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2019/04/24/how-to-run-systemd-in-a-container/

> * https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/master/docs/tutorials/rootless_tutorial.md

Reviewer: https://podman.io/
http://docs.podman.io/en/latest/
http://docs.podman.io/en/latest/Tutorials.html

Main podman-doc  and  "tutorials" links would be nice to add it.
